# pastpath: smarter historic marker discovery with NLP

## Overview

This service uses natural language processing to determine similarities between historic markers in Washington, D.C. based primarily on the text on the historic markers, along with metadata from associated Wikipedia pages, and is able to construct suggested walking tour routes for users.

## Web app

The app is built using FastAPI and queries a PostgreSQL database containing historic marker information and the results of NLP analysis. The app has been deployed to an AWS EC2 instance using Gunicorn and Nginx and is hosted at <http://pastpath.tours>.

### Local testing

The app has been Dockerized with the backend in an image built on top of `tiangolo/uvicorn-gunicorn-fastapi:python3.7`. The front-end is served out of a `nginx`-based image.

To test the image locally:

```bash
$ docker-compose up
```

This starts up the database, nginx, and app containers. The nginx container is accessible at `localhost:8080`. The `nginx.conf` configures nginx to make the backend accessible at /api/v1/. The `backend` container  the app is connected to the `db` postgres container within a `pastpath_app_local` network via port 5436, which is only accessible via the network.

Local docker-compose:

- serves app frontend with nginx at localhost:8080
- serves app backend at localhost:8080/api/v1/ (and within `app_local` network at `backend:8080`)
- mounts local volumes with both app and database data
- uses `.env` and `.env.db` env_files

### Deployment

Following steps assume running on an EC2 instance with docker-compose installed and this repo cloned.

#### Overview

1) Add .env and static files not maintained in repo (`.env.prod`, `.env.prod.db`, `web/app/static/img/*.jpg`)
2) Seed database (see below)
3) Bring up containers (db, web, then nginx): `docker-compose -f docker-compose.prod.yml up -d`

#### Details

Deployment is defined in `docker-compose.prod.yml` inspired by [this](https://testdriven.io/blog/dockerizing-django-with-postgres-gunicorn-and-nginx/#production-dockerfile).

Production docker-compose:

- publishes container running nginx to ports 80 and 443
- backend API accessible at `/api/v1/` and autogenerated docs at `/api/v1/docs`
- uses a static_volume attached to the nginx services containing the static files
- uses `.env.prod` and `.env.prod.db` env_files
- uses a postgres_data volume attached to the db service
- containers reside in `pastpath_app` network

The entire application runs behind nginx as a proxy server, which quickly handles requests from the internet and is configured to serve the static files. Behind nginx, Gunicorn is used as a process manager for the app, and is run using Uvicorn workers. Uvicorn uses the asynchronous ASGI interface used by FastAPI.

The app runs out of a Docker container built on top of the `tiangolo/uvicorn-gunicorn-fastapi` image. The PostgreSQL database runs in a separate Docker container.

#### Start and seed database

Assume existing database already exists and seed script exists (e.g. dumped to file with `$ pg_dump -d <db_name> > ./backup/marker_db_dump.sql`).

```bash
$ docker-compose -f docker-compose.prod.yml up -d db
$ docker-compose -f docker-compose.prod.yml run -v path/to/backup:/backup db bash
```

Within database container, seed database:

```bash
$ psql -U <username> -h db.pastpath_app -p <port> -f /backup/marker_db_dump.sql
$ exit
```

Because the postgres data is mounted to a docker volume, the database contents are preserved with `docker-compose -f docker-compose.prod.yml down`. The contents are removed if the volume is also removed, e.g. with `docker-compose -f docker-compose.prod.yml down -v`.

## Analysis scripts

Much of the NLP analysis is performed ahead of time, before the user interacts with the web app. The folder `scripts/` contains scripts used to take input data from the historic marker database (<https://www.hmdb.org>), process it, and load it to a SQL database to be used by the FastAPI app in `app/`. The entire pipeline of scripts from input to output can be run from the command line using `scripts/pipeline.py`, with command-line flags to control which portions of the pipeline are run. In brief, the four steps and associated command-line flags are:

- `--ner`: Take a csv file of historic markers, pre-process the historic marker texts, perform named entity recognition using Spacy, and perform manual cleaning of the resulting named entities. Output csv of which named entities are in each historic marker text. (code in `scripts/ner.py`)
- `--cf`: Collect features from csv files of named entities, Wikipedia page categories (previously collected with `/scripts/wikitext.py`), decade features (previously collected from date entities), and HMDB categories. Merge into single DataFrame which binary encodes each marker for the presence or absence of each feature, and filter out very infrequently (or frequently) appearing features. Output to csv. (code in `scripts/collect_features.py`)
- `--pf`: Process features: weight features by TF-IDF, calculate similarities of weighted feature vectors (cosine similarity), find clusters (k-means) in reduced dimensions (latent semantic analysis). Output csv of similarity scores, cluster labels, and top terms associated with each cluster. (code in `scripts/process_features.py`)
- `--db`: Interact with postreSQL database. Take csv files of marker data, similarity matrix, named entity counts per marker, and cluster labels, and write them as the appropriate tables in a PostgreSQL database. Can deploy either to local machine or to AWS EC2 instance hosting the web app via ssh tunnel. (code in `scripts/db.py`)

## Web app dependencies

See `web/app-requirements.in` and `web/app-requirements.txt` (generated with pip-tools).

## Analysis script dependencies

- `numpy`
- `pandas`
- `scipy`
- `sklearn`
- `spacy` (with `en_core_web_lg` language model)
- `sqlalchemy`
- `sqlalchemy_utils`
